Title: Reliable and reproducible Earth System Model data analysis with ESMValTool
Authors: Valeriu Predoi for the ESMValTool development team
Session: https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU25/session/52077

Abstract

ESMValTool is a software tool for analyzing data produced by Earth System Models (ESMs) in a reliable and
reproducible way. It provides a large and diverse collection of “recipes” that reproduce standard, as well as
state-of-the-art analyses. ESMValTool can be used for tasks ranging from monitoring continuously running ESM
simulations to analysis for scientific publications such as the IPCC reports, including reproducing results from
previously published scientific articles as well as allowing scientists to produce new analysis results.

To make ESMValTool a user-friendly community tool suitable for doing open science, it adheres to the FAIR
principles for research software. It is:

- Findable - it is published in community registries, such
as https://research-software-directory.org/software/esmvaltool;
- Accessible - it can be installed from Python package community distribution channels such as conda-forge,
and the open-source code is available on Zenodo with a DOI, and on GitHub;
- Interoperable - it is based on standards: it works with data that follows CF
Conventions and the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) Data Request, its reusable recipes are written
in YAML, and provenance is recorded in the W3C PROV format. It supports diagnostics written in a number of
programming language, with Python and R being best supported. Its source code follows the standards and best
practices for the respective programming languages;
- Reusable - it provides a well documented recipe format and Python API that allow reusing previous analyses
and building new analysis with previously developed components. Also, the software can be installed from
conda-forge and DockerHub and can be tailored by installing from source from GitHub.

In terms of input data, ESMValTool integrates well with the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) infrastructure.
It can find, download and access data from across the federation, and has access to large pools of observational datasets.

ESMValTool is built around two key scientific software metrics: scalability and user friendliness. An important aspect of user friendliness is reliability. ESMValTool is built on top of the Dask library to allow scalable and distributed computing, ESMValTool also uses parallelism
at a higher level in the stack, so that jobs can be distributed on any standard High Performance Computing (HPC) facility;
and software reliability and reproducibility - our main strategy to ensure reliability is modular, integrated, and tested design.
This comes back at various levels of the tool. We try to separate commonly used functionality from “one off” code, and make sure
that commonly used functionality is covered by unit and integration tests, while we rely on regression testing for everything else.
We also use comprehensive end-to-end testing for all our “recipes” before we release new versions.

Our testing infrastructure ranges from basic unit tests to tools that smartly handle various file formats, and use image
comparison algorithms to compare figures. This greatly reduces the need for ‘human testing’, allowing for built-in robustness
through modularity, and a testing strategy that has been tailored to match the technical
skills of its contributors.

Abstract specifications: 488 words, 3216 characters
